POSITION	AA	Category	Comment
10	F	Accessory	L10F is a common non-polymorphic, PI-selected accessory mutation associated with reduced susceptibility to DRV, FPV, IDV, LPV, and NFV.
10	IV	Other	L10I/V are polymorphic, PI-selected accessory mutations that increase the replication of viruses with other PI-resistance mutations.
10	RY	Other	L10R/Y are rare, non-polymorphic PI-selected mutations. Their effects on PI susceptibility have not been well studied.
11	IL	Other	V11I is a relatively non-polymorphic accessory mutation selected in patients receiving DRV. It is included in the Tibotec DRV genotypic susceptibility score. V11L is a nonpolymorphic PI-selected mutation associated with reduced DRV and FPV susceptibility when it occurs in combination with other PI-resistance mutations.
20	I	Other	K20I is the consensus amino acid in subtype G and CRF02_AG. In subtypes B and C, K20I is a PI-selected accessory mutation that reduces NFV susceptibility.
20	MV	Other	K20M/V are rare, relatively non-polymorphic PI-selected mutations that have not been well studied.
20	R	Other	K20R is a highly polymorphic PI-selected accessory mutation.
20	T	Accessory	K20T is a non-polymorphic accessory PI-selected mutation associated with reduced susceptibility to each of the PIs except DRV and TPV.
23	I	Accessory	L23I is an uncommon non-polymorphic mutation selected primarily by NFV. It causes low-level NFV resistance.
24	FM	Accessory	L24I is a non-polymorphic mutation selected by IDV and LPV. It contributes reduced susceptibility to each PI except DRV and TPV. L24F/M are uncommon non-polymorphic PI-selected mutations. L24F has a susceptibility profile similar to L24I.
24	I	Accessory	L24I is a non-polymorphic mutation selected by IDV and LPV. It contributes reduced susceptibility to each PI except DRV and TPV.
30	N	Major	D30N is a non-polymorphic mutation that causes high-level resistance to NFV.
32	I	Major	V32I is a non-polymorphic PI-selected mutation associated with reduced susceptibility to each of the PIs except SQV. It is included in the Tibotec DRV genotypic susceptibility score.
33	F	Accessory	L33F is a relatively non-polymorphic accessory mutation selected by each of the PIs. In combination with other PI-resistance mutations, it is associated with reduced susceptibility to each of the PIs. It is included in the Tibotec DRV genotypic susceptibility score.
43	T	Accessory	K43T is a non-polymorphic PI-selected accessory mutation. K43T is included in the Boehringer-Ingelheim TPV genotypic susceptibility score.
46	IL	Major	M46I/L are relatively non-polymorphic PI-selected mutations. In combination with other PI-resistance mutations, they are associated with reduced susceptibility to each of the PIs except DRV.
46	V	Accessory	M46I/L are relatively non-polymorphic PI-selected mutations. In combination with other PI-resistance mutations, they are associated with reduced susceptibility to each of the PIs except DRV. M46V is a rare non-polymorphic PI-selected mutation that has not been well studied.
47	A	Major	I47A is a non-polymorphic mutation selected by LPV. It usually occurs in combination with V32I and in this context it confers high-level resistance to LPV and FPV and low/intermediate-resistance to the remaining PIs except ATV and SQV.
47	V	Major	I47V is a non-polymorphic PI-selected mutation associated with reduced susceptibility to each of the PIs except SQV and ATV. I47V is included in the Tibotec DRV genotypic susceptibility score.
48	ASTQL	Major	G48V is a non-polymorphic mutation selected by SQV and, less often, by IDV and LPV. It confers high-level resistance to SQV, intermediate resistance to ATV, and low-level resistance to NFV, IDV and LPV. G48M is a non-polymorphic mutation selected in viruses with multiple PI-resistance mutations. Its effects appear to be similar to those of G48V. G48A/S/T/Q are rare non-polymorphic mutations selected in viruses with multiple PI-resistance mutations.
48	M	Major	G48V is a non-polymorphic mutation selected by SQV and, less often, by IDV and LPV. It confers high-level resistance to SQV, intermediate resistance to ATV, and low-level resistance to NFV, IDV and LPV. G48M is a non-polymorphic mutation selected in viruses with multiple PI-resistance mutations. Its effects appear to be similar to those of G48V.
48	V	Major	G48V is a non-polymorphic mutation selected by SQV and, less often, by IDV and LPV. It confers high-level resistance to SQV, intermediate resistance to ATV, and low-level resistance to NFV, IDV and LPV.
50	L	Major	I50L is a non-polymorphic mutation selected by ATV. It causes high-level resistance to ATV and increases susceptibility to most of the remaining PIs.
50	V	Major	I50V is a non-polymorphic mutation selected by DRV, LPV and FPV. It causes low-level, intermediate, and high-level resistance to DRV, LPV, and FPV, respectively. It is included in the Tibotec DRV genotypic susceptibility score.
53	L	Accessory	F53L is a non-polymorphic accessory PI-selected mutation that reduces susceptibility primarily to ATV, SQV, and NFV.
54	ATS	Major	I54A/T/S are non-polymorphic PI-selected mutations that occur almost exclusively in viruses with multiple PI-resistance mutations. I54A/T/S are associated with reduced susceptibility to each of the PIs except DRV.
54	LM	Major	I54M/L are non-polymorphic mutations selected primarily by DRV and FPV. I54M reduces susceptibility to each of the PIs. I54L reduces susceptibility to each of the PIs except TPV. I54M/L are each included in the Tibotec DRV genotypic susceptibility score.
54	V	Major	I54V is a non-polymorphic PI-selected mutation that contributes reduced susceptibility to each of the PIs except DRV.
58	E	Accessory	Q58E is a non-polymorphic accessory PI-selected mutation associated with reduced susceptibility to TPV and possibly other PIs.
71	IL	Other	A71I/L are non-polymorphic, PI-selected accessory mutations that appear to increase the replication of viruses with other PI-resistance mutations.
71	TV	Other	A71V/T are polymorphic, PI-selected accessory mutations that increase the replication of viruses with other PI-resistance mutations.
73	STCADV	Accessory	G73S/T/C/A are non-polymorphic accessory PI-selected mutations. They are associated primarily with reduced susceptibility to ATV, SQV, FPV, IDV, and NFV. G73V/D are rare non-polymorphic PI-selected mutations.
74	P	Accessory	T74P is a non-polymorphic PI-selected accessory mutation that occurs primarily in viruses from patients who have received multiple PIs. It is associated with reduced susceptibility to each of the PIs. It is included in the Boehringer-Ingelheim TPV and Tibotec DRV genotypic susceptibility scores.
74	S	Other	T74S is a PI-selected accessory mutation that is polymorphic in most non-B subtypes.
76	V	Major	L76V is a non-polymorphic mutation selected by IDV, LPV and DRV. It reduces susceptibility to these PIs and to FPV and NFV. It increases susceptibility to ATV, SQV and TPV. L76V is included in the Tibotec DRV genotypic susceptibility score.
82	A	Major	V82A is a non-polymorphic mutation selected primarily by IDV and LPV. It reduces susceptibility to these PIs and contributes cross-resistance to each of the remaining PIs except DRV and TPV.
82	C	Major	V82C is an uncommon non-polymorphic mutation that occurs primarily in viruses with multiple other PI-resistance mutations. Its effects on PI susceptibility have not been well studied.
82	F	Major	V82F is a non-polymorphic mutation selected primarily by IDV and LPV. It reduces susceptibility to these PIs and contributes cross-resistance to each of the remaining PIs.
82	I	Other	V82I is a highly polymorphic mutation that is not selected by PIs. It is the consensus amino acid in subtype G viruses.
82	L	Major	V82L is an uncommon non-polymorphic mutation selected by TPV. It reduces TPV susceptibility but its effects on other PIs have not been well studied.
82	M	Major	In most subtypes, V82M is a 2-base-pair mutation that develops in viruses with multiple other PI-resistance mutations. In subtype G, V82M is a 1-base-pair mutation. V82M reduces susceptibility to IDV, LPV and possibly other PIs.
82	TS	Major	V82T/S are non-polymorphic PI-selected mutations. They are associated with reduced susceptibility to each of the PIs except DRV. V82T is included in the Boehringer-Ingelheim TPV genotypic susceptibility score.
83	D	Accessory	N83D is a non-polymorphic mutation selected primarily in patients who have received multiple PIs. It is included in the Boehringer-Ingelheim genotypic susceptibility score for TPV.
84	AC	Major	I84A is an extremely rare non-polymorphic PI-selected substrate-cleft mutation associated with high-level resistance to each of the PIs except possibly DRV. I84C is an extremely rare non-polymorphic PI-selected mutation associated with varying degrees of reduced susceptibility to each of the PIs.
84	V	Major	I84V is a non-polymorphic mutation selected by each of the PIs. It causes high-level resistance to ATV, FPV, IDV, NFV and SQV, intermediate resistance to LPV and TPV, and low-level resistance to DRV.
85	V	Other	I85V is a non-polymorphic PI-selected mutation. It has minimal, if any, effects on PI susceptibility.
88	D	Accessory	N88D is a non-polymorphic mutation selected by NFV usually in combination with D30N. It reduces NFV susceptibility and may cause low-level cross-resistance to ATV and SQV.
88	S	Major	N88S is a non-polymorphic mutation usually selected by NFV, ATV, or IDV. It causes high-level resistance to NFV and ATV and low-level resistance to IDV and SQV. It increases susceptibility to DRV and FPV.
88	TG	Major	N88G/T are extremely rare non-polymorphic PI-selected mutations that reduce susceptibility to NFV and ATV.
89	VT	Accessory	L89V is a non-polymorphic PI-selected accessory mutation that contributes reduced susceptibility to FPV, DRV, NFV, and IDV. L89V is included in the Tibotec DRV genotypic susceptibility score. L89T is a rare non-polymorphic PI-selected mutation that has not been well studied.
90	M	Major	L90M is a non-polymorphic PI-selected mutation that reduces susceptibility to each of the PIs except TPV and DRV.
	Level	Dosage	There is evidence for high-level DRV resistance. If DRV is administered it should be used twice daily.
	Level	Dosage	There is high-level DRV resistance and intermediate TPV resistance. Phenotypic testing and/or expert consultation may be useful. To see the precise TPV report re-run the program after adding TPV to the results being displayed.
	Level	Dosage	There is high-level DRV resistance and low-level TPV resistance. Phenotypic testing and/or expert consultation may be useful. To see the precise TPV report re-run the program after adding TPV to the results being displayed.
	Level	Dosage	There is high-level DRV resistance and potential low-level TPV resistance. Phenotypic testing and/or expert consultation may be useful. To see the precise TPV report re-run the program after adding TPV to the results being displayed.
	Level	Dosage	There is high-level DRV resistance and TPV susceptibility. Phenotypic testing and/or expert consultation may be useful. To see the precise TPV report re-run the program after adding TPV to the results being displayed.
	Level	Dosage	There is evidence for intermediate DRV resistance. If DRV is administered it should be used twice daily.
	Level	Dosage	There is evidence for low-level DRV resistance. If DRV is administered it should be used twice daily.
